# 2.2 Environment and Extent

---

Author: Doug Hoyte

Translator: Yuqi Liu <[yuqi.lyle@outlook.com](mailto:yuqi.lyle@outlook.com)>

---

What Steele means by assignable value cells is an environment for storing pointers to data where the environment is subject to something called _indefinite extent_. This is a fancy way of saying that we can continue to refer to such an environment at any time in the future. Once we allocate this environment, it and its references are there to stay as long as we need them. Consider this C function:
```c
#include <stdlib.h>

int *environment_with_indefinite_extent(int input) {
  int *a = malloc(sizeof(int));
  *a = input;
  return a;
}
```
After we call this function and receive the pointer it returns, we can continue to refer to the allocated memory indefinitely. In C, new environments are created when invoking a function, but C programmers know to **malloc()** the required memory when returning it for use outside the function.


By contrast, the example below is flawed. C programmers consider **a** to be automatically collected when the function returns because the environment is allocated on the _stack_. In other words, according to lisp programmers, **a** is allocated with _temporary extent_.
```c
int *environment_with_temporary_extent(int input) {
  int a = input;
  return &a;
}
```
The difference between C environments and lisp environments is that unless you explicitly tell lisp otherwise it always assumes you mean to use indefinite extent. In other words, lisp always assumes you mean to call **malloc()** as above. It can be argued that this is inherently less efficient than using temporary extent, but the benefits almost always exceed the marginal performance costs. What's more, lisp can often determine when data can safely be allocated on the stack and will do so automatically. You can even use _declarations_ to tell lisp to do this explicitly. We will discuss declarations in more detail in [chapter 7, Macro Efficiency Topics](https://letoverlambda.com/index.cl/guest/chap7.html).

But because of lisp's dynamic nature, it doesn't have explicit pointer values or types like C. This can be confusing if you, as a C programmer, are used to casting pointers and values to indicate types. Lisp thinks about all this slightly differently. In lisp, a handy mantra is the following:
> _Variables don't have types. Only values have types._

Still, we have to return something to hold pointers. In lisp there are many data structures that can store pointers. One of the most favoured by lisp programmers is a simple structure: the _cons cell_. Each cons cell holds exactly two pointers, affectionately called car and cdr. When **environment-with-indefinite-extent** is invoked, a cons cell will be returned with the car pointing to whatever was passed as **input** and the cdr pointing to **nil**. And, most importantly, this cons cell (and with it the pointer to **input**) has indefinite extent so we can continue to refer to it as long as we need to:
```
(defun environment-with-indefinite-extent (input)
  (cons input nil))
```
The efficiency disadvantages of indefinite extent are approaching irrelevance as the state of the art in lisp compilation technology improves. Environments and extent are closely related to closures and more will be said about them throughout this chapter.
