# 3.7 Duality of Syntax

---

Author: Doug Hoyte <[doug@hoytech.com](mailto:doug@hoytech.com)>

Translator: Yuqi Liu <[yuqi.lyle@outlook.com](mailto:yuqi.lyle@outlook.com)>

---

One of the most important concepts of lisp is called duality of syntax. Understanding how to use dualities and why they are important is an underlying theme of macro writing and of this book. Dualities are sometimes designed and sometimes accidentally discovered. To programmers of non-lisp languages the reality of dual syntax would be too unbelievable to describe at this point in the book so we will for now shy away from a direct definition. Instead, you, the reader, gets to discover it again and again as it is applied slowly and carefully so as to avoid shock. Should you experience headaches or other discomfort through the course of this book, I recommend that you immediately execute a garbage collection cycle (get some sleep), then return with a fresh and open mind.

Referential transparency is sometimes defined as a property of code where any expression can be inserted anywhere and always have the same meaning. Introducing syntactic duals is the conscious violation of referential transparency and discovering them is reaping the fruits of a language that enables such violations. While other languages only let you build with semi-transparent panes of glass, lisp lets you use an assortment of smoke, mirrors, and prisms. The magic dust is made of macros, and most of its best tricks are based on syntactic duals.

This section describes an important dual syntax we have already discussed but have not yet completely explored: COMMON LISP uses the same syntax for accessing both of its major types of variables, dynamic and lexical. This book tries to illustrate the real power of dynamic and lexical scope and why COMMON LISP's decision to use dual syntax is important.

The purpose of dynamic scope is to provide a way for getting values in and out of lisp expressions based on when the expression is evaluated, not where it is defined or compiled. It just so happens that, thankfully, the syntax that COMMON LISP defines for this is identical to that used to access lexical variables, which are the exact opposite of dynamic variables in that they always refer to the locations they were compiled for, independent of when the access takes place. In fact, without external context in the form of a declaration, you can't tell which type of variable an expression is referring to. This dual syntax violates referential transparency, but rather than being something to avoid, lisp programmers welcome this because just as you can't differentiate an expression without context, neither can a macro. Hold that thought for a second. First, it must be made clear that creating bindings for dynamic variables does not create lexical closures. As an example, let's re-bind the variable temp-special that we earlier declared special:
```
* (let ((temp-special 'whatever))
    (lambda () temp-special))

#<Interpreted Function>
```
Even though it is a let over lambda, this is not a lexical closure. This is a simple evaluation of a lambda macro form in some dynamic context which results in, of course, an anonymous function. This function, when applied, will access whatever current dynamic environment exists and fetch that value of temp-special. When the lambda macro was evaluated, a dynamic binding of temp-special to the symbol whatever existed, but who cares? Remember that lambda forms are constant objects, just simple machine code pointer returners, so evaluating this lambda form never even accesses the dynamic environment. What happens to our symbol whatever? After lisp is done evaluating the lambda form, it removes it from the dynamic environment and throws it away, unused.

Some early lisps did support dynamic closures, which meant that every function defined in a non-null dynamic environment had its own (possibly partially shared) stack of dynamic bindings. The effect is similar to COMMON LISP's lexical scope and was implemented with something termed a spaghetti stack[SPAGHETTI-STACKS][INTERLISP-TOPS20]. This data structure is no longer a stack data structure, but actually a multiple path, garbage collected network. COMMON LISP does away with spaghetti stacks and only provides lexical closures[MACARONI].

So lexical and dynamic variables are actually completely different, deservedly distinct concepts that just happen to share the same syntax in COMMON LISP code. Why on earth would we want this so-called duality of syntax? The answer is subtle, and only consciously appreciated by a minority of lisp programmers, but is so fundamental that it merits close study. This dual syntax allows us to a write a macro that has a single, common interface for creating expansions that are useful in both dynamic and lexical contexts. Even though the meanings of expansions of the macro can be completely different given their context, and even though each can mean entirely different things underneath, we can still use the same macro and the same combinations of this macro with other macros. In other words, macros can be made ambivalent about not only the contents of their macro arguments, but also about the different meanings of their expansions. We can use the macro just for its understood code transformation, ignoring the semantic meanings of the code, all because the code only has meaning once we use it somewhere—it has no meaning during macro processing. The more dualities of syntax there are, the more powerful an associated macro becomes. Many more examples of the advantages of dual syntax are detailed through this book. The duality between dynamic and lexical variables is a mild (but useful) example of this lispy philosophy. Some macros are created for the specific purpose of having powerful duals, and sometimes there are many more than two possible meanings for an expansion.

A traditional convention in COMMON LISP code is to prefix and postfix the names of special variables with asterisk characters. For example, we might've chosen to name our temp-special variable _temp-special_. Since this convention is almost like having another namespace for dynamic variables, diminishing their duality with lexical variables, this book does not follow it exactly. The asterisks are merely convention and, fortunately, COMMON LISP does not enforce them. Not only can we leave the asterisks off special variable names, but we can add them to lexical variable names. Maybe it is a question of style. Which is a lesser fashion crime: lexical variables with asterisks or special variables without? I tend to think the less verbose of the two. Also, the names of lexical and special variables can be gensyms, a concept that transcends print names on symbols.

So, as mentioned, this book hijacks the usual asterisk convention. Instead of

Asterisked variable names indicate special variables.

this book uses

Asterisked variable names indicate special variables defined by the standard.

My largest motivation for dropping these variable name earmuffs is simple and subjective: I think they are annoying to type and make code look ugly. I will not go so far as to suggest you do this for your own programs, just mention that I have been leaving off the earmuffs for years and am very content with COMMON LISP.
